.\"   Copyright 2020 Perry Lorier
.\"
.\"  Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
.\"  you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.\"  You may obtain a copy of the License at
.\"
.\"      http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
.\"
.\"  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
.\"  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
.\"  WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
.\"  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
.\"  limitations under the License.
.\"
.\"  SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
.TH erbium 8 2020-06-28 Linux "System management commands"
.SH NAME
erbium \- Network services for small/home networks.
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBerbium\fR \fI[path/to/erbium.conf]\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
erbium is a collection of networking service for small/home networks.  Erbium
is designed to be an easily configured daemon that provides all the networking
protocol support you need for a small/home network.
.PP
Currently erbium supports DHCP and has limited support for DNS, but other
protocols are planned.
.PP
erbium ships a number of related binaries.  The main \fBerbium\fR binary
implements all the protocols in one integrated binary, but there are individual
binaries for each protocol to allow testing.  Note that when running the
combined \fBerbium\fR binary the protocols will integrate with each other, but
when run separately there is no integration between the protocols.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP path/to/erbium.conf
Provide the path to the configuration file to read instead of erbium.conf

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.IP RUST_BACKTRACE=full
erbium is written in rust, so you can configure the rust runtime how to display
backtraces using environment variables.

.SH FILES
erbium.conf
.SH BUGS
erbium is currently under active development, and many important features and protocols are not yet complete, or even
implemented yet.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR erbium.conf (5),
.BR erbium-dns (8),
.BR erbium-dhcp (8),
.BR erbium-conftest (8)

